Simulating Random Graphs in Python: 

Erdos--Renyi, Watts--Strogatz, and
 Barabasi--Albert Models 
 
 Zachariah Attila Markusson 
 
 Student Number: 2370278 

Submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements

 for the module MA-300: Undergraduate Project in
 Mathematics
 
 Department of Mathematics

 Swansea University
 
 Academic Year 2025--2026 
 
 Word count: XXXX

CHAPTER: Introduction

Networks are ubiquitous in the real world. The internet and social media
platforms are clear examples; infectious diseases spread in similar
patterns, and even the structure of the brain can be viewed as a network.
Despite the variety of different contexts in which you find them, many of
these systems share common structural properties: short average typical
distances between nodes, high odds for neighbours to be connected, and
highly connected hubs. A good example comes from the “Kevin Bacon game”,
based on a network where actors are linked if they have appeared in a film
together: in this graph, almost every pair of actors can be connected by only
a handful of steps, and a small number of highly prolific actors act as hubs,
Kevin Bacon being an obvious example, having an average path length of three.
This combination of short paths, clustering within genres or production
circles, and heavily connected hubs mirrors the qualitative features seen
in many technological, biological, and social networks .
Up until the late 1990's the standard models, such as the Erdos--Renyi
random graph and the regular ring lattice, where each
node connects only to its nearest neighbours, were not able to simultaneously
capture all of these properties. The Erdos--Renyi model produced short
path lengths but very little clustering, while the ring lattice produced
high clustering but unrealistically long paths between nodes. The
introduction of the Watts--Strogatz model and the Barabasi--Albert
model in 1998 and 1999 respectively 
addressed these shortcomings and provided a richer framework for
comprehending the archetecture of real world networks.

In the context of this dissertation a random graph is a graph where
edges are placed according to a set of probabilistic rules for the
presence or absence of edges. Each new instance of a random graph is
non--deterministic, due to its stochastic nature, meaning it involves
or contains a random variable or process. Studying such graphs allows
one to speak meaningfully about typical properties, such as expected 
degree, average path length, or about phase transitions in connectivity
as parameters vary. This project focused on three random graph models
that capture different aspects of real--world networks: the
Erdos--Renyi model, the Watts--Strogatz small--world model,
and the Barabasi--Albert scale--free model.

I had three main aims that I developed over the course of the
dissertation. First, I aimed to develop a rigorous understanding of
the Erdos--Renyi model, the Watts--Strogatz model,
and the Barabasi--Albert model, with the properties and key network
metrics being a primary focus. Second, to implement each model in
Python using the NetworkX library and to design a simulation suite
capable of performing large parameter sweeps in a reproducible way.
And third, to validate the simulation outputs against theoretical
predictions by storing results in an SQLite database and comparing
empirical measurements with known results such as the Erdos
--Renyi phase transition, the small--world window, and the
power--law degree scaling in the Barabasi--Albert model.

The remainder of this dissertation is organised to move from
mathematical foundations to individual model analysis,
to my conclusions. Chapter 2 introduces the necessary mathematical
foundations, including basic graph related definitions, commonly
used network metrics, and probabilistic tools required later.
Chapter 3 describes the computational implementation in Python,
detailing how I designed the graph generator functions, the SQLite
persistence layer, the metric--computation layer, and the plotting
used to produce the figures. Chapters 4--6 cover the
Erdos--Renyi model, the Watts-Strogatz small--world model,
and the Barabasi--Albert scale--free model respectively,
presenting the definitions and simulation results. Chapter 7 then
compares the three models, and Chapter 8 provides the conclusion.

This project builds directly on material from several undergraduate
modules in pure and applied mathematics. Probability theory is key
in interpreting the behaviour of random graph models,
particularly in understanding expected values, variability, and
connectivity thresholds. Combinatorics and graph theory provide the
discrete foundations for counting edges, degrees, and paths, as well as
explaining how independent Bernoulli trials lead to binomial and Poisson
degree distributions in the Erdos--Renyi model. Together, these
areas form the mathematical basis for both the analytical and
simulation--based aspects of this project.

SECTION: Research Questions

To focus the analysis, I formulated three research specific questions
that are specific and testable. This helps to structure the mathematical
analysis and the simulation design. It also provides a basis for
evaluating whether the project has successfully met its goals. Each
question targets one of the random graph models key features.

enumerate
 
- RQ1 -- Phase transition location (ER model). At 
 what value of the edge probability p does the giant component 
 fraction first exceed 0.5 in simulations of G(n, p) with 
 n = 1000, and how does this compare with the theoretical threshold 
 p c = 1/n?

- RQ2 -- Small-world window boundaries (WS model). 
 Over what range of rewiring probability does the 
 Watts-Strogatz model simultaneously maintain high clustering 
 (C( )/C(0) > 0.5) and short average path length 
 (L( )/L(0) < 0.5), and how precisely can this 
 ``small-world window'' be identified from simulation data?

- RQ3 -- Power-law scaling in the BA model. Does the 
 degree distribution of simulated Barabasi-Albert networks follow 
 a power law with exponent 3 as predicted by 
 mean-field theory, and does the mean degree scale as 
 k = 2m across different values of the attachment 
 parameter m?
enumerate

CHAPTER: Mathematical Foundations

In this chapter I will summarise the mathematical background needed
for the three random--graph models. It explains graph--theory definitions,
key network metrics,and the probability concepts behind the 
Erdos--Renyi, Watts--Strogatz, and Barabasi--Albert models.

SECTION: Graphs: Nodes, Edges, and Adjacency

A graph G=(V,E) consists of a set V of vertices and an edge set E
of unordered pairs of distinct vertices. Vertices represent the objects,
and edges represent relationships.

definition[Graph]
 A graph G = (V, E) consists of a finite vertex set V
 with |V| = n and an edge set
 E \\u,v\ : u,v V,\; u v \.
definition

A graph is called simple if it contains no self--loops
(edges from a vertex to itself) and no multi--edges (more than
one edge between the same pair of vertices). A graph is called
undirected if every edge \u,v\ is unordered, meaning
that a connection from u to v implies an equally valid
connection from v to u. All graphs in this dissertation are
simple and undirected unless stated otherwise.

The neighbours of a vertex v are the vertices directly
connected to v by an edge, that is, the set
N(v) = \u V : \u,v\ E\.
A path between two vertices u and v is a sequence of
distinct vertices u = w 0, w 1, , w = v such that
\w i-1, w i\ E for each i; the length of the
path is the number of edges .

A random graph is a probability distribution over the set
of all graphs on a fixed vertex set V; equivalently, it is a
graph--valued random variable. Each instance drawn from this
distribution is a deterministic graph, but the
ensemble of all instance encodes a probability distribution
over graph structures . The three models
studied in Chapters 4--6 each define such a distribution in a
specific way.

The adjacency structure of a graph can be represented by an 
n n matrix. Fix an ordering of the vertices, and 
define the adjacency matrix A by
\[
 A ij =
 cases
 1, & if \i,j\ E,

 0, & otherwise.
 cases
\]
For a simple undirected graph, A is symmetric with zeros on
the diagonal.

The degree of a vertex v, denoted (v), is the 
number of neighbours of v, i.e.\ (v) = |N(v)|.
The degree sequence of a graph is the list
\[
 ( (v 1), (v 2), , (v n) ).
\]
The mean degree is defined by
\[
 k 
 = 1n v V (v)
 = 2|E|n,
\]
where the identity v (v) = 2|E| holds because each
edge contributes one to the degree of each of its two endpoints.

In the Erdos--Renyi model G(n,p), edges are present 
independently with probability p [0,1]. For this 
model the expected mean degree satisfies
\[
 E[ k ] = (n-1)p np
\]
when n is large. This quantity plays a central role in 
characterising the connectivity properties and phase 
transition behaviour of random graphs.

A connected component of G is a maximal set of
vertices S V such that every pair of vertices in S
is joined by a path contained entirely within S. By
maximal we mean that no additional vertex can be added to
S while preserving this property. A graph is called
connected if it has exactly one connected component,
i.e.\ a path exists between every pair of vertices.

As a concrete example, consider a graph with four vertices 
V = \a,b,c,d\ and edges
\[
 E = \\a,b\,\, \b,c\,\, \c,d\ \.
\]
The adjacency matrix is
\[
 A =
 pmatrix
 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 

 1 & 0 & 1 & 0 

 0 & 1 & 0 & 1 

 0 & 0 & 1 & 0
 pmatrix,
\]
the degree sequence is (1,2,2,1), and the mean degree 
is k = 6/4 = 1.5. This graph is connected,
since a path exists between every pair of vertices.

SECTION: Key Metric Definitions

To compare the three random graph models, we will use 
a set of network metrics that appears in figures in
the results chapters. This section defines the degree 
distribution, clustering coefficient, average path length, 
giant component fraction, and graph density
.

Degree distribution.
The degree distribution P(k) of a graph is the 
fraction of vertices with degree exactly k:

This summarises how connectivity is spread across the network.
For large k, the behaviour of P(k) is called the
tail of the distribution. Networks whose tails decay
slowly, such that very high--degree vertices are far more common than in a
normal distribution are called heavy--tailed, and are associated
with the presence of highly connected hubs. Networks whose tails decay
slowly, such that very high-degree vertices are far more common than in a
normal distribution, are called heavy-tailed, and are associated
with the presence of highly connected hubs.
Networks whose degree distributions follow a power law
(defined in Section below) are called
scale--free.

Clustering coefficient.
A clique is a set of vertices that are all pairwise
connected to one another; the clustering coefficient measures
how close a vertex's neighbourhood is to forming a clique.
The local clustering coefficient C(v) of a vertex 
v with (v) 2 is
\[
 C(v) =
 number of edges among neighbours of v
 (v)2,
\]
where (v)2 = (v)( (v)-1)2 is
the total number of pairs of neighbours, i.e.\ the maximum
possible number of edges among them.
By convention C(v) = 0 if (v) 1. The 
average clustering coefficient of the graph is

This captures the tendency of a network to contain 
tightly connected local neighbourhoods .

Average path length.
For two vertices u and v that lie in the same connected component,
the distance d(u,v) is the length of a shortest path between
them.
Let G denote the largest connected component of the graph,
with n G = |V(G)| vertices.
The average path length is

where the sum runs over all ordered pairs within G.
When the graph is fully connected n G = n and the
expression reduces to the standard population mean.
This quantity measures how many steps are required on average to
travel between two randomly chosen vertices in the connected core
of the network .

Giant component fraction.
The largest connected component of a graph is the
connected component (defined in Section )
with the greatest number of vertices. When its size grows
proportionally to n as n , it is called the
giant component. The giant component fraction is

where V giant denotes the vertex set of the 
largest connected subgraph. This metric is central to 
studying connectivity phase transitions in the 
Erdos--Renyi model .

Graph density.
The density of an undirected simple graph 
with n vertices and |E| edges is

which measures the fraction of possible edges that are 
actually present. The sparser the network, the closer 
is to zero, while denser networks have closer to one
.

These metrics provide a means of comparing the 
Erdos--Renyi, Watts--Strogatz, and Barabasi--Albert 
models and for answering the research questions.

SECTION: Probabilistic Groundwork

All three random graph models used in this dissertation are 
probabilistic objects: edges are present or absent according to 
specified random mechanisms. This section briefly recalls the 
basic probability distributions and limit theorems required to 
analyse their degree distributions and connectivity properties
.

A Bernoulli trial is a random experiment with exactly two
outcomes, usually coded as X = 1 (success) and X = 0
(failure), with probabilities

The binomial distribution Bin(n,p) describes 
the total number of successes in n independent Bernoulli
trials with the same success probability p. Its
probability mass function (the function giving the
probability of each specific outcome) is

In the Erdos--Renyi model G(n,p), the degree of a fixed 
vertex has distribution Bin(n-1,p), since each of the 
other n-1 vertices is independently joined to it with 
probability p.

The Poisson limit theorem states that if n 
and p = p n is chosen so that = np n remains
fixed, then Bin(n,p n) becomes increasingly
well-approximated by a Poisson random variable with parameter
 . The Poisson distribution has probability mass function

This result applies to sparse Erdos--Renyi graphs,
meaning graphs where p = /n for a fixed constant
 , so that the mean degree = np stays bounded
as n grows rather than increasing with the number of vertices.
In this regime the degree of each vertex approximates a
Poisson random variable with mean .

Finally, a power-law distribution is one whose tail
behaves like

for some exponent > 1 as k . Networks whose 
degree distributions follow a power law are often called
scale-free, because the shape of the distribution looks
similar regardless of the scale at which degrees are measured:
multiplying k by any constant changes P(k) only by a
multiplicative factor, preserving the overall form. The
Barabasi--Albert model is an example of a random graph model
that produces approximate power--law degree distributions with
exponent 3 .

The formal definitions in this chapter follow the treatment
in and ; the metric
definitions in Section are also used
throughout .

CHAPTER: Computational Implementation

In this chapter I will summarise the computational methodology used to
obtain the results and figures in the rest of the dissertation. All
simulations use the key metrics defined in Chapter ,
including the degree distribution P(k) ,
clustering coefficient C , average path length
L , giant component fraction
 , and graph density .
The implementation is split into four parts: graph generation, metric
computation, persistent storage, and plotting. My aim here is to explain
how these fit together rather than walk through the code line by line ---
the most relevant excerpts are in Appendix .

SECTION: Graph Generation and Metric Computation

Each model is implemented as a wrapper around the corresponding NetworkX
generator. The wrappers validate their inputs before calling the
generator --- for instance, the Watts--Strogatz wrapper raises an error
if k is odd, since the ring lattice construction requires an even
initial degree, and the Barabasi--Albert wrapper requires m 1.
Each wrapper also accepts an optional integer seed so that any
individual graph can be reproduced exactly. The three generators are
stored in a dictionary MAKERS keyed by model name, which
lets the bulk simulation loop call whichever model it needs without any
branching logic.

Once a graph has been generated, a single function
compute metrics computes all five metrics. The degree
distribution is built by collecting the degree of every vertex into a
frequency count. Average clustering is computed by calling
nx.average clustering, which averages the local value
C(v) over all vertices, consistent with equation .

Average path length needs some care when the graph is not connected.
A naive average over all pairs is undefined if some pairs have no
connecting path. The function handles this by identifying the largest
connected component with
max(nx.connected components(G), key=len) and restricting
all shortest-path computations to that subgraph. If the largest
component contains only a single vertex, both average path length and
diameter are returned as NaN rather than causing an error.
This is consistent with how average distance is treated in
, where distances are only defined between vertices
in the same connected component. The fraction of vertices in the giant
component is then = |V giant|/n, and density is
calculated directly from the edge count.

SECTION: Parameter Sweeps and Sampling

The sweeps are managed by a function bulk simulate parallel,
which takes a model name, a parameter grid as a dictionary of lists, and
a number of repetitions per parameter combination. It builds the
Cartesian product of all parameter values, assigns a unique integer seed
to each job by incrementing from a fixed starting value, and then
distributes graph generation and metric computation across available CPU
cores using ProcessPoolExecutor. Database writes happen
serially after the parallel stage, which avoids file-locking errors
from multiple processes trying to write to the same SQLite file
simultaneously. Because every job has its own seed, the full sweep can
be re-run at any time and produce identical results.

For the Erdos--Renyi model, graphs are generated at n = 1000
over a grid of edge probabilities p chosen to span the phase transition
threshold p c = 1/n. Running many independent instances at each value
of p and averaging the metrics smooths out the run-to-run variance
and makes the rise of the giant component fraction clearly visible.
A separate set of runs at n = 2000 with p = / n fixed at
 = 8 is used for the Poisson residual analysis in
Section . The larger graph size is needed there
because the degree distribution tail is noisy at n = 1000 and the
fit to the Poisson curve is less clean.

For the Watts--Strogatz model, n = 500 and k = 8 are fixed while
 varies over a logarithmically spaced grid from 10^-4 to 1.
This range is wide enough to capture the full transition from regular
lattice to near-random graph. For the Barabasi--Albert model, n = 500
is fixed and the attachment parameter m is varied over
\1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 12\, which spans the range needed to verify the
mean-degree relation k = 2m. A separate set of runs at
n = 2000 is used in Chapter for the log-log degree
distribution, since at n = 500 the tail truncates too early for a
reliable power-law slope estimate.

SECTION: Persistent Storage and Analysis

Every simulation run is written to a SQLite database as a single row in
a table called runs. The row stores the model name, all
parameters as a JSON string, the random seed, a timestamp, and each of
the five scalar metrics. The degree distribution is stored as a JSON
list of [k, count] pairs, meaning the full degree sequence can
be recovered from the database without needing a separate table.

Storing everything in a database rather than in memory turned out to be
more useful than I expected. The function query runs retrieves
rows with optional filtering by model name, sorting by any column, and
a row limit. Being able to sort all Watts--Strogatz runs by average path
length, or all ER runs by clustering, made it easy to spot which
parameter combinations were interesting without manually scanning output
files. It also meant figures could be regenerated from stored data
without re-running the simulations --- which matters when some sweeps
take a while to complete. The ER Poisson figure, for example, is
produced by querying all n = 2000 runs at a fixed p, aggregating
their degree counts into a single histogram, and overlaying the
theoretical Poisson curve --- the aggregation happens entirely at query
time, not during simulation.

SECTION: Reproducibility and Finite-Size Effects

All simulations follow the same procedure: for each point in the
parameter grid, multiple graphs are generated with independent seeds,
the metrics of Section are computed, and sample means
and standard deviations are recorded. The graph sizes used in each
experiment are stated at the start of the relevant chapter, and all
results can be reproduced by repeating the same parameter grids with
the same starting seeds.

Some deviation between the simulated results and the theoretical
predictions is expected and does not indicate a problem with the
implementation. The theoretical thresholds for the Erdos--Renyi
phase transition, the Watts--Strogatz small-world window, and the
Barabasi--Albert power-law exponent are all asymptotic statements
that describe the behaviour of graphs as n . At finite n,
the phase transition is spread over a window of width O(n^-1/3)
around the critical point, the power-law tail truncates at a maximum
degree that grows slowly with n, and the normalised clustering and
path length curves in the Watts--Strogatz model depend on both n and
k. The simulation results in Chapters 4--6 are interpreted alongside
these finite-size corrections throughout, and any discrepancy from the
asymptotic prediction is treated as something the theory itself
predicts, not something that needs explaining away.

SECTION: Reproducibility and Scale

All simulations follow the same procedure: for each point in the
parameter grid, multiple graphs are generated using independent random
seeds, the Key Metrics of Section are computed, and
sample means and standard deviations are recorded.
The graph sizes used in each experiment are stated at the start of the
relevant chapter; all results can be reproduced by repeating the same
parameter grids with the same seeds.
Some deviation between simulated thresholds and their limiting values is
expected and is interpreted as a finite-size effect rather than a failure
of the underlying theory.

The Erdos--Renyi Model

SECTION: Definition and Construction

definition
 The Erdos--Renyi model G(n,p) is defined as the 
 probability space on graphs with vertex set 
 [n] = \1,2, ,n\, where n is the number of nodes,
 in which each of the n2 = n(n-1)2
 possible edges is included independently with probability 
 p [0,1]. This simple rule immediately determines 
 the basic statistics of the model.

definition
The number of edges |E| is a binomial random variable with
\[
E[|E|] = n2 p.
\]
The degree of any fixed vertex v is the sum of n-1 independent
Bernoulli(p) indicators , so
\[
 (v) Bin(n-1, p), E[ (v)] =
(n-1)p np for large n.
\]

Setting = np so that the mean degree is , we
write p = /n. By doing this the probability of an edge
decreases as the graph grows, keeping the average degree
fixed. This is the sparse regime, which is most relevant to
real--world networks where the average number of connections per 
node remains finite even as n .

The model was introduced by Erdős and Rényi . A
rigorous treatment of the sparse regime is provided
in .

In Python, a single instance can be generated via:
verbatim
G = nx.erdos renyi graph(n=500, p=0.016, seed=42)
verbatim

The full simulation pipeline is given in 
Section .

SECTION: Degree Distribution and the Poisson Limit

The degree distribution follows directly from the construction.
Since each of the n-1 other vertices connects independently with
probability p, we have
\[
P( (v) = k) = n-1k p^k (1-p)^n-1-k.
\]

For large n with = np fixed, this converges to a
Poisson distribution. Indeed,
\[
n-1k p^k ((n-1)p)^kk! 
 ^kk!,
 
(1-p)^n-1-k e^- ,
\]
so that
\[
P( (v) = k) e^- ^kk!.
\]

This is the Poisson limit theorem applied to graph
degrees . The Poisson distribution has
mean and variance both equal to , so the degree
distribution is concentrated around with standard
deviation .

In particular, there are no hubs. The max degree grows only as
\[
O\! ( n n ),
\]
and extremely high--degree nodes are exponentially unlikely.

Figure compares the simulated degree distribution
(averaged over 1115 runs at n = 2000) with the theoretical
Poisson(8.00) curve. The agreement is almost identical. 
The RMSE of 0.00015 confirms a near perfect fit.

SECTION: The Phase Transition

A defining feature of the Erdős--Rényi model is a sharp change in
connectivity as = np crosses 1.

SUBSECTION: Subcritical regime ( < 1)

When < 1, the graph consists of many small components.
With high probability, all components have size at most
O( n), and no giant component exists.

The largest component has size approximately
\[
2I n,
 
I = - 1 - > 0,
\]
where I is the Cramér rate
function .

SUBSECTION: Critical point ( = 1)

At = 1, a component of size O(n^2/3) appears 
this is the critical point, at this point the clusters scale
between log(n) and n. The fluctuations are of order
n^-1/3 .

SUBSECTION: Supercritical regime ( > 1)

For > 1, a unique giant component appears with size
\[
(1- )n + o(n),
\]
where is the smallest non-negative solution of
\[
 = e^- (1- ).
\]

Here, represents probability that the branching process eventually
dies out (extinction probability), and 1- gives the fraction of
vertices in the giant component. For example, when = 2, solving
numerically yields 0.203, so the giant component
occupies about 79.7% of the graph .

SUBSECTION: Connectivity threshold

Full connectivity requires a higher edge probability. For
\[
p = n + cn,
\]
the probability that G(n,p) is connected converges to
\[
e^-e^-c
 as n .
\]
Thus, connectivity emerges at scale (n)/n, much larger than
1/n.

SUBSECTION: Answer to RQ1

Figure 4.2 shows the giant component fraction rising from near zero
at p = 0.0005 to >0.9 at p 0.003. The empirical 0.5 
threshold occurs at p 0.0014, slightly above the theoretical
p c = 1/n = 0.001 ( = 1), as expected for n = 1000.

The reason for the error is very likely due to the finite--size effect,
for n = 1000 the giant normally slowly ramps up over the critical window
width, meaning that 0.0014 is very accurate 

SECTION: Single-Instance Visualisation

Figure shows a graph of G(80, 0.07). Node sizes are
nearly uniform, reflecting the concentration of degrees around
 = 80 0.07 5.6. Unlike scale-free networks,
no hubs are visible.

The observed statistics (n=80, |E|=238,
 k = 5.95, clustering =0.056, giant component
=100%, average path length =2.64) align with theoretical
expectations. In particular:
itemize
 
- Clustering p 0.07,
 
- Short path length is consistent with 
 O\! ( n n ),
 
- Degree distribution closely matches
 Poisson(5.95).
itemize

This single-instance behaviour is consistent with the aggregate
results shown in Figure .

CHAPTER: The Watts--Strogatz Model

SECTION: Motivation: The Small-World Phenomenon

In 1967 Stanley Milgram asked volunteers to forward a letter
to a target they did not know using only personal
acquaintances. The result was that successfully
delivered letters typically passed through only about six
intermediaries, giving rise to the phrase ``six degrees of
separation''. 

This observation is surprising because social networks are 
enormous, yet the average distance between two
individuals is very small. The fog gets lifted once
clustering is considered. In social networks, a person's
friends are often friends with one another, creating many
local triangles.

An Erdős--Rényi graph with the same number of vertices and
edges does have short paths, but its clustering coefficient
is small, asymptotically of order p and therefore close to
zero in the sparse regime. A regular ring lattice has the
opposite behaviour. Clustering is high, but path lengths grow
linearly with n. Neither model can capture both problems at
once.

Watts and Strogatz identified this problem and proposed the
model that now bears their names . Their
model is a regular ring lattice, except it uses random
structure, and Albert and Barabási later showed that the
small-world property is widespread in networks such as the
World Wide Web, power grids, and neural systems .

SECTION: Definition and Construction

The Watts--Strogatz model WS(n,k, ) is made as
follows. First, place n vertices on a ring and label
them 0,1, ,n-1. Second, connect each vertex u to its
k/2 nearest neighbours on each side, so that u is linked
to
\[
u 1,\; u 2,\; ,\; u k/2
\]
with indices taken modulo n. This produces a k-regular
ring lattice, so k must be even.

Third, each lattice edge is independently rewired with
probability . When an edge \u,v\ is rewired, the
endpoint v is replaced by a uniformly chosen vertex
w u, excluding self-loops and duplicate edges.

The two extreme cases are what are most interesting. When
 =0 no edges are rewired and the graph is exactly the
regular ring lattice. Its clustering coefficient is approximately
\[
C 0 3(k-2)4(k-1),
\]
while its average path length satisfies
\[
L 0 n2k.
\]
When =1, every edge is rewired and the graph behaves
like a random graph, with clustering on the order
of k/n and average path length on the order of
 (n)/ (k).

SECTION: The Small-World Regime

The key result of the Watts--Strogatz model is that a small
number of random rewired edges can massively reduce path length
while leaving clustering close to its lattice value over a
much larger range of . The key observation is that these
two metrics respond to rewiring on different scales of . 
This is the key idea behind small world
models and the basis of Figure .

The logic is as follows. In the ring lattice, any
journey between distant vertices must proceed step by step
around the ring. By rewiring an edge it acts as a shortcut and
connects two distant regions of the graph directly. Because
shortcuts reduce distances multiplicatively, even a small
amount of rewired edges can decrease average path length
from O(n) to O( n).

Clustering behaves differently. It is controlled by local
neighbourhood structure, a small number of long--range
shortcuts does not significantly disrupt the original 
lattice. The graph therefore remains clustered while
becoming globally navigable.

Figure shows this behaviour.
The path length drops sharply near 10^-3,
whereas the clustering coefficient stays close to
its lattice value until roughly 10^-2.
This creates a window in which L( )/L(0) is already
small while C( )/C(0) is still large.

Answer to RQ2. The small-world window is
approximately
\[
10^-3 < < 10^-1.
\]
Table reports the simulation values of
the two normalised metrics at the claimed boundaries.
At the lower boundary = 10^-3, the path length
has already begun to fall (L( )/L(0) 0.81)
while clustering is entirely intact (C( )/C(0) 
1.00). At the upper boundary = 10^-1, path length
has decreased to 14% of its lattice value
(L( )/L(0) 0.14) while clustering still reads
C( )/C(0) 0.75, comfortably above 0.5.
Both RQ2 thresholds C( )/C(0) > 0.5 and
L( )/L(0) < 0.5 are satisfied simultaneously
throughout the interior of this interval, confirming the
prediction of Watts and Strogatz .

SECTION: Effect of the Rewiring Parameter

The mean degree remains fixed at k = 8.00
for all values of . Edges are redirected, but the number
of them cannot change. This confirms that changes in clustering
and path length are not caused by changes in edge density.

The clustering coefficient falls smoothly from about 0.64
at =0, in agreement with the lattice estimate
3(k-2)/[4(k-1)], to about 0.02 at =1. The decay is
gradual rather than abrupt on the linear scale.

The average path length shows the most extreme change. It falls
from about 31 near =0, consistent with
n/(2k)=500/16 31.3, to about 3.2 by =0.1.
Most of this reduction occurs in a narrow interval between
 =10^-3 and =10^-2. This is exactly the
small-world window highlighted in
Figure .

The giant component fraction is identically 1.00 for all
values of . Edges are preserved, so isolated clusters
never appear.

SECTION: Visualising the Lattice-to-Random Transition

Figure shows three instances of
WS(80,4, ) at =0.0, 0.1, and 1.0
in a circular layout.

At =0, the graph is a perfect ring lattice. Every
vertex has four neighbours and the structure is highly
regular. The corresponding values show that clustering is
high and path length is long.

At =0.1, a small number of the shortcuts are
visible crossing the ring. These shortcuts reduce path
length dramatically while leaving much of the local
structure intact. This shows the small-world regime
quite well.

At =1.0, the lattice structure is completely gone.
The graph is random, there is no clustering, and path length
is very short.

Figure also shows a single instance of
WS(80,6,0.1). The degree distribution is narrow
and centred near k=6, confirming that rewiring preserves
degree and that the model remains locally homogeneous even
when shortcuts are present.

The Barabasi--Albert Model

SECTION: Motivation: Scale-Free Networks

Many real--world networks have a small number of highly connected
vertices. A tiny fraction of web pages receive the majority of
links; a small number of scientific papers gather most citations;
and a few airports handle most passenger traffic. Such systems
have heavy-tailed degree distributions rather than the narrow,
concentrated distributions produced by Erdős--Rényi or
Watts--Strogatz graphs.

Studies of the World Wide Web, citation networks,
and protein interaction networks suggest power-law behaviour
of the form
\[
P(k) k^- ,
\]
with exponents typically between 2 and 3 .

Barabási and Albert explained this by using preferential
attachment . New vertices are
more likely to connect to vertices that already have high
degree, creating a ``rich get richer'' dynamic. This
naturally generates hubs and heavy tails.

SECTION: Definition and Construction

The Barabási--Albert model BA(n,m) grows a graph
sequentially. It begins with a small initial graph of
m 0 m vertices. At each step, a new vertex is added and
connected to m existing vertices.

The attachment targets are chosen using the preferential
attachment rule
\[
 (u G t)
=
 (u)2|E(G t)|,
\]
so the probability of selecting a vertex is proportional to
its current degree. Since high-degree vertices are more
likely to receive new edges, hubs naturally emerge.

After t-m 0 attachment steps, the graph has t vertices
and approximately
\[
m 0 + m(t-m 0) mt
\]
edges for large t. The mean degree is therefore
\[
 k 2mtt = 2m.
\]
This relation is verified directly in
Figure and provides the first part of
RQ3.

SECTION: The Power-Law Degree Distribution

The central result of the Barabási--Albert model is the
emergence of a power-law degree distribution. As
n , the degree distribution satisfies
\[
P(k) 2m^2 k^-3,
\]
so the power-law exponent is = 3, independent of
m . This is the second
part of RQ3.

A standard mean--field argument gives the result. Let
n k(t) be the number of vertices of degree k at time
t. The relative frequencies n k(t)/t approach stationary
values p k. A vertex of degree k gains a new edge with
at a rate proportional to k/(2mt), because the total degree
is approximately 2mt. Since each step adds m edges,
the expected change in n k is
\[
 n k
 
m k-12mt n k-1
-
m k2mt n k
+
1 k=m.
\]
Passing to the stationary limit yields the recursion
\[
p k = k-1k+2 p k-1,
 k>m,
\]
with p m = 2/(m+2). Applying the recursion
k-1 times from k = m+1 down to k = m gives

The numerator is the falling product
(k-1)(k-2) m = (k-1)!\,/\,(m-1)!\,; the
denominator is (k+2)(k+1) (m+2) = (k+2)!\,/\,(m+1)!\,.
Substituting and cancelling (m+2):

which gives
\[
p k = 2m(m+1)k(k+1)(k+2),
\]
and hence
\[
p k 2m^2 k^-3
\]
for large k .

This behaviour is qualitatively different from both earlier
models. Erdős--Rényi graphs have Poisson tails, while
Watts--Strogatz graphs preserve a narrow degree distribution
because rewiring does not change the degree of any vertex.
The BA model by contrast has large degree variance
and common hubs. This has important consequences for
robustness and spreading processes .

Answer to RQ3. Figure 
confirms that k = 2m across the tested
values of m, with negligible scatter.
Figure shows the log-log degree
distribution aggregated over 200 runs at n=2000,
m=2. An OLS fit over k [2, 50] yields a slope of
-2.73 (R^2 = 0.998), giving 2.73.
This falls short of the theoretical = 3, which is
expected: at finite n = 2000 the power-law tail is
truncated at around k 50--80, and the OLS
estimate is therefore pulled upward by the curvature of
that truncation. As n the tail extends and
the slope converges to -3 ;
the finite-n discrepancy is thus itself a prediction of
the theory, not a failure of the model.

SECTION: Robustness and Vulnerability

The heavy--tailed degree distribution makes BA networks
asymmetric in their response to node removal.

SUBSECTION: Robustness to random failures

Because most vertices have low degree, a randomly chosen
vertex is unlikely to be a hub. Removing random vertices
therefore leaves the giant component largely intact. This
property called error tolerance was discussed
by Albert, Jeong, and Barabási in their classic study of
network robustness .

By contrast Erdős--Rényi graphs are homogeneous. Random
removal affects all vertices more evenly, so the giant
component degrades at a rate more directly tied to the
fraction removed.

SUBSECTION: Vulnerability to targeted attacks

The same structure that protects BA networks against random
failure also makes them vulnerable to losing hubs.
Removing vertices in descending order of degree causes
the giant component to fragment rapidly. This asymmetry is
one of the most important practical consequences of
preferential attachment .

CHAPTER: Model Comparison and Discussion

SECTION: Structural Differences Between the Three Models

The three models studied in this dissertation each produce a
qualitatively distinct type of graph, and the differences are
most clearly visible in the degree distribution.
Erdős--Rényi produces a Poisson distribution concentrated
near its mean, with variance equal to and an
exponentially decaying tail: the probability of finding a
vertex with degree k is negligible.
Watts--Strogatz produces a distribution that is far narrower than the
Barabasi--Albert tail, for a different reason from Erdos--Renyi.
In the WS construction every vertex starts with exactly k edges.
Each rewiring transfers one edge endpoint from a current neighbour
v to a newly chosen vertex w: u's degree is unchanged, v's
degree decreases by one, and w's degree increases by one.
Consequently the mean degree k is exactly preserved,
while individual degrees can deviate from k by small amounts.
For small rewiring probability only a fraction of edges
are redirected, so very few vertices experience a degree change; the
distribution remains sharply concentrated near k with a narrow spread
of order k, unlike the heavy tail of the BA model or the
Poisson spread of the ER model.
The barabási--Albert produces a heavy-tailed distribution with no
characteristic scale. As shown in
Section P(k) 2m^2 k^-3 for
large k meaning that high-degree hubs occur far more often
than any Poisson or binomial model would predict.

SECTION: Quantitative Comparison

Table summarises the measured metrics
averaged across all simulation runs at n = 500 and a common
mean degree of k 6.

Looking at Table we see three things.
First, the clustering coefficient differ massively between ER
(C = 0.012) and WS
(C = 0.49) despite having identical mean degrees. For ER the
theoretical prediction is C p 0.012 and the
simulation confirms this. For WS the lattice
formula C 0 3(k-2)/[4(k-1)] 0.50 gives the
correct order of magnitude even at = 0.05 showing
that clustering is resilient to moderate rewiring. WS achieves
higher clustering than ER at the same cost in mean degree.

Second, the Barabási--Albert model achieves the shortest
average path length (L = 3.01) despite having similar clustering
to ER. This reflects the presence of hubs: in a
scale-free network, most vertices are within a short distance
of a high-degree hub, and hubs are connected to one another.
The routing efficiency of hubs reduces path length without
requiring the local triangle structure that produces
clustering.

Third, ER is the only model in which the giant component
fraction falls noticeably below 1. At p = 0.012 the
graph is well above the connectivity threshold, but isolated
vertices still appear at finite n. WS and BA are always
connected by construction. WS because rewiring preserves all
edges, and BA because every new vertex adds at least m 1
edges linking it to the existing graph.

SECTION: Which Model for Which Network?

The structural differences in Table 
suggest natural application domains for each model.

The Erdős--Rényi model is most appropriate as a control:
something against which the structure of a real network can
be compared. If a real network has properties that differ
significantly from those of G(n,p) with the same n and
p those differences carry information about the mechanisms
generating the network. ER is also analytically tractable
and its phase transition is one of the most precisely
understood phenomena in probabilistic combinatorics.

The Watts--Strogatz model is appropriate when both local
clustering and global navigability are required. Social
networks in which people know their friends' friends but also
have access to distant contacts through a few long-range
connections are a good example. The collaborative network of
mathematicians has clustering coefficient
approximately 0.14 , far above the ER prediction
for the same mean degree, and average path length consistent with a
small-world graph.

The Barabási--Albert model is appropriate when growth and
inequality in degree are both important. Citation networks,
the World Wide Web, and the internet at the autonomous systems
level all exhibit power-law degree distributions with
exponents in the range (2, 3) ,
consistent with preferential attachment. The model also
makes specific predictions about robustness. Because most
vertices have low degree random node failures are unlikely
to affect the giant component while targeted removal of
high-degree hubs is catastrophic .

SECTION: Limitations

Several limitations of the present analysis should be noted.
All simulations were performed at n = 500 which is small
relative to most real-world networks. This has some drawbacks,
namely the ER phase transition is broadened and shifted, and
the BA power-law tail is truncated at degrees far below those
observed in large real networks. Larger simulations would
sharpen all three of these features, but the all-pairs
shortest path computation used to calculate L scales as
O(n^2), making n 1000 computationally expensive
without algorithmic optimisation.

The graphs produced are also undirected, unweighted, and
simple. Many real networks are directed (web hyperlinks,
citation relationships), weighted (flight routes by
passenger volume, social ties by contact frequency), or
both. Extensions of all three models to the directed and
weighted setting exist in the literature ,
but are beyond the scope of this project.

Finally, none of the three models produces both high
clustering and a power-law degree distribution
simultaneously. Real networks that exhibit both properties require
richer models such as the hierarchical network model or
fitness-based preferential attachment. The three models
studied here are foundational precisely because they isolate
single mechanisms: random connectivity, local rewiring, and
growth with attachment bias. Understanding each in isolation
is a prerequisite for understanding more complex models.

CHAPTER: Conclusion

This dissertation set out to understand, implement, and
validate three foundational random graph models. All three
research questions are answered affirmatively, and the
simulation suite provides quantitative evidence for each
answer.

RQ1 (ER phase transition). The giant component
fraction rises from near zero to above 0.9 as p increases
from 0.0005 to 0.003 at n = 1000. The
threshold at which the giant component first exceeds half the
graph is p 0.0014 compared with the theoretical
prediction p c = 1/n = 0.001. The discrepancy of
40% is consistent with finite-size effects at n = 1000.
The theoretical result is an asymptotic statement as n ;
the transition broadens over a window in which = np lies
within O(n^-1/3) of the critical value c = 1, or
equivalently within O(n^-4/3) in p .
As n increases this window narrows and the empirical and theoretical
thresholds converge.

RQ2 (WS small-world window). The small-world window
is identified as approximately 10^-3 < < 10^-1.
At the lower boundary the simulation gives
L( )/L(0) 0.81 and C( )/C(0) 1.00.
Path length has already begun to fall while clustering is
essentially undisturbed. At the upper boundary
L( )/L(0) 0.14 and C( )/C(0) 0.75.
Path length has decreased to 14% of its lattice value while
clustering still exceeds the 0.5 threshold of RQ2.
Both conditions C( )/C(0) > 0.5 and
L( )/L(0) < 0.5 are satisfied
throughout the window, consistent with the
predictions of Watts and Strogatz .

RQ3 (BA power law and mean degree). The relation
 k = 2m holds across values of
m with negligible scatter. This confirms the edge-counting
argument from Section . The log-log degree distribution
(Figure ) gives an OLS slope of -2.73
(R^2 = 0.998, n = 2000, 200 runs), consistent with the
theoretical = 3: the finite-n truncation of the tail
predictably pulls the fitted exponent below its asymptotic value.

SECTION: What Simulation Adds Beyond Asymptotic Theory

Theoretical results describe the limit n , but
finite networks are what appear in practice. The simulations
in this project make the approach to those limits visible in
a way that equations alone cannot. The ER threshold exists
at all n but at n = 500 it is a smooth ramp rather than
a sharp step. The ramp width is itself a quantitative
prediction of the theory. The WS small-world window exists at
all n, but the precise values of C( )/C(0) and
L( )/L(0) at the window boundaries depend on n and
k. BA power-law tails truncate at n=500 (degrees 30),
precluding reliable estimation. This finite-size behaviour
matches theoretical predictions exactly and provides a legitimate
test of the model.

SECTION: Future Work

There are two things I thought I might have to expand on
to reach the word--count. First, studying how the
ER transition width scales with n
would connect the simulation results to the O(n^-1/3)
prediction of critical random graph theory. Second, dynamic
processes such as epidemic spreading modelled by
susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR) dynamics could be
simulated on graphs from each model, testing how the degree
distribution affects the epidemic threshold and the final
infected fraction. The simulation infrastructure developed
here is directly extensible to all three directions.

CHAPTER: Final Reflections

tocchapterFinal Reflections

When I submitted my Project Plan in November, I described my main weakness as
``applying abstract definitions to real-world situations''. Reading that back
now, I think the problem was more specific than I realised at the time. I did
not yet have a reliable method for moving from a mathematical definition to
something I could test, plot, or argue about quantitatively. This dissertation
was, in large part, an attempt to build that method.

SECTION: What the Project Plan Got Wrong

My Project Plan was optimistic in ways that are now obvious. The schedule was
too linear. Week one for Python, week two for Erdos--Renyi, and so
on. I based this on the assumption that implementing a model and understanding it
were essentially the same task. They are not. erdos renyi graph
worked within a day; understanding why p = 1/n was the interesting value
took considerably longer and required rereading Chapter 4 of van der
Hofstad in full. The delay that caused was worthwhile,
but it was not in the plan.

More telling, the plan mentioned eigenvalues, spectral clustering, Laplacian
matrices, and Jacobian matrices as tools I expected to need. None of these
appear in the final dissertation. That mismatch is not a failure of execution;
it reflects the fact that I wrote the plan before I understood what the project
was actually about. The goals were also vague: ``analyse their degree
distribution'' is not a testable target. The three research questions in
Section only emerged after reading the relevant theory, and
having precise, quantitative targets from the start would have focused the
simulation design considerably.

SECTION: Key Mistakes

The biggest mathematical error concerned the extinction probability
 in Section . My draft labelled as the
survival probability and then claimed the giant component fraction was .
The two statements obviously contradicted each other directly. Tracing van der
Hofstad Theorem 4.8 carefully resolved it. I had not thought carefully
about what the branching process was modelling.

A subtler error arose when writing the answer to RQ2. I had simply regurgitated the
small--world window as 10^-3 < < 10^-1 without actually checking
whether the stated thresholds C( )/C(0) > 0.5 and L( )/L(0) < 0.5
met at those boundaries. The simulation data was in the database the
whole time. Retrieving those values
directly, C( )/C(0) 0.75 and L( )/L(0) 0.14 at
 = 10^-1, and C( )/C(0) 1.00 with L( )/L(0)
 0.81 at = 10^-3, turned an approximate claim into a
verified one. It was a reminder that reporting a result and checking
a result are different things.

SECTION: Mathematics to Code

Coding forced precision that reading alone did not. Average path length is
undefined for a disconnected graph; I had to decide what the metric
meant before I could implement it, which led me to restrict computation
to the largest connected component, consistent with van der Hofstad's
conditional treatment . The two lines of code were trivial;
the theoretical justification for them was not.

Watts--Strogatz normalisation caused a similar issue. My first sweep
normalised C( ) by its simulated value at = 0.001 rather than
at = 0. This produced ratios slightly above 1 near the left boundary,
which is impossible. Fixing it required going back to the lattice formula
C 0 3(k-2)/[4(k-1)] and using that as the denominator. The lesson
was that normalisation is a modelling choice requiring theoretical
justification.

The Barabasi--Albert log-log plot was harder than anticipated. A single run
at n = 30 produced a tail truncated at degree 20 and an OLS
slope nowhere near -3. Only by aggregating over many runs at larger n did
the tail stabilise.

The SQLite database was not in my plan at all, but storing every simulation
run systematically turned out to be the difference between anecdotal and
systematic analysis. Being able to query and sort across the full parameter
grid was what made the boundary-value check for RQ2 straightforward rather
than laborious.

SECTION: What I Would Do Differently

Read more theory before writing any code. Several bugs were symptoms of
conceptual gaps, not programming errors, and the code could not reveal the
gap until I returned to the mathematics. Formulate quantitative research
questions early. Vague targets produced unfocused simulations.
Back up everything, a hard drive failure a week before the first
draft presentation was an expensive way to learn that lesson. Finally, budget
significantly more time for the Barabasi--Albert power-law analysis; the
finite-size effects on the slope were themselves a theoretical prediction and
deserved to be tested as such from the start, not diagnosed retrospectively.

SECTION: Key Takeaway

The cycle of reading a definition, misapplying it in code or a plot,
returning to the source, and correcting it is something I did not have
the patience for before this project. I still find it frustrating when
it happens but I now recognise it as the normal process of understanding
something properly rather than a sign that something has gone wrong.

thebibliography99

hofstad2017
 R. van der Hofstad,
 Random Graphs and Complex Networks, Volume I.
 Cambridge University Press, 2017.

watts1998
 D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz,
 ``Collective dynamics of `small-world' networks,''
 Nature, 393, 440--442, 1998.

barabasi1999
 A.-L. Barabasi and R. Albert,
 ``Emergence of scaling in random networks,''
 Science, 286(5439), 509--512, 1999.

erdos1959
 P. Erdos and A. Renyi,
 ``On random graphs I,''
 Publicationes Mathematicae Debrecen, 6,
 290--297, 1959.

networkx
 A. A. Hagberg, D. A. Schult, and P. J. Swart,
 ``Exploring network structure, dynamics, and function using
 NetworkX,''
 in Proc.\ 7th Python in Science Conference (SciPy 2008),
 pp. 11--15, 2008.

albert2002
 R. Albert and A.-L. Barabasi,
 ``Statistical mechanics of complex networks,''
 Reviews of Modern Physics, 74, 47--97, 2002.

bollobas2001
 B. Bollobas,
 Random Graphs, 2nd edn.
 Cambridge University Press, 2001.

baconbible1999
 Six Degrees of Kevin Bacon, available at:
 https://oracleofbacon.org/

thebibliography

CHAPTER: Python Source Code

The following listings contain the core computational components of the
simulation suite. Graph generators, plotting routines, and the
main driver are omitted; the excerpts shown correspond directly
to the methodology described in Chapter .

SECTION: Metric Computation

SECTION: SQLite Persistence Layer

SECTION: Parallel Parameter Sweep

SECTION: Watts--Strogatz Small-World Plot

CHAPTER: Use of AI Tools

During this project, I used AI-assisted tools (specifically Claude) at various stages of the work. 
These tools were used to help structure the written report, as a proofreading tool, and to assist 
with writing and debugging Python code.

The mathematical content, research questions, simulation design, and interpretation of results 
presented in this dissertation are my own work. The AI was used as a writing, planning, and coding 
support tool, not as a substitute for understanding or original work. All AI-generated suggestions 
were checked, revised, and integrated by me, and I take full responsibility for the accuracy and 
content of this dissertation.
